When we think and decide many of us like to imagine that there is a rational process we have taken and that we consciously experienced this process, that we can recall it, and that we can hopefully explain it to another person. Certainly many of us who think of themselves as sufficiently educated and reasonably sophisticated feel that if a person holds views we think are wrong, any review of the robustness of their thinking process would surely reveal the problem that led to their error. Perhaps they have a false assumption, maybe they took a wrong turn on their way to the conclusion, they could have fallen prey to any of the dozens if not hundreds of catalogued cognitive biases that label and describe known ways that human thinking can often falter and become irrational.

Prior to 2024, LLMs were infamously inscrutable, providing no working steps and revealing no trains of thought on the way to their confident conclusions and explanations. During 2024 we saw the first signs of LLMs offering to support their exposition with a sequence of thinking steps. With the addition of these descriptions of "metacognition", we might have greater confidence that the LLM has not "hallucinated" or malfunctioned. 

The trouble is, these descriptions of thinking steps may be pure fiction. The question then becomes, does this make them more like humans or less?

People, especially academics, often commit to be swayed by a well-reasoned argument that stems from accepted premises. It is upheld as a foundational principle of rationality. When we need to defend our conclusions against skeptics, often we, like an experienced lawyer, construct an argument to most strongly support the conclusion, regardless of whether this line of thinking is related to the path taken to reach it.

Anyone who has worked on a complex project in a modern office has experienced various forms of coordinated thinking: brainstorming, cost-benefit analysis and others. It might be tempting to imagine that there is always a process which is always being experienced by the self and that so long as we're paying attention, we can generally remember, record or otherwise have access to the metacognitive process that happens on the way to a conclusion. Certainly there sometimes is and while nobody is perfect and we may catch ourselves occasionally, even saying "I don't know what I was thinking", most of us like to think we are reasonably rational most of the time. But do humans really experience our thinking procedures this way, as they happen? Can we merely attend to the mental machinery in motion and remember its activity? It may be confronting to consider ourselves generally less rational than the way this cherished narrative ascribes but isn't it possible we much more often leap to conclusions like a flash and only call in the inner lawyer to build a logical case for it after the fact, and only then if required by bothersome external scrutiny?

We know that a person who wishes to be certain about their thinking should "do the math". They should play devils advocate and mull things over. Diligent thinkers and professional analysts alike embody a practice of attempting to overcome cognitive biases and errors in thinking by adopting skeptical or adversarial mental self-interrogations. Clearly there is a capacity there which demands that an exemplary practice must be consciously adopted.

We can accept that there is a spectrum of analytical formality and a corresponding resulting decision quality that we have the option to employ, sometimes at prohibitive cost in time and effort and the wise approach is to selectively dial in the appropriate amount of analytical formality to suit the situation, sometimes opting for something akin to shooting from the hip and other times employing a pencil and paper or even a spreadsheet. Indeed some areas of human endeavour, especially those in matters of the heart or one's creative passions, are believed to benefit from a more intuitive practice where the delicate butterfly of our ideas and visions could risk being pinned to the board by overanalysing and rendered lifeless in the process.

However, even people who strongly advocate making most of their life choices solely through intuition, people who fundamentally identify as "an intuitive person" even outside matters of a mystical such as human relationships and making art or music, even these people find it insulting to refer to this method as "irrational".

Therefore it seems there is a strong cultural force around metacognition that leads us to what could be called an aspirational assumption about our rationality and the most likely conclusion we should consider is that we are a lot less rational than we like to think. Perhaps this is a metacognitive bias.

Applying this conclusion to myself seems to warrant the same skepticism for LLM claims about thinking steps. 

I distrust my human confidence in my own cognition metamodel. I may have a story about how I came to conclusions and the reasoning steps I've taken but I have no business believing this story when objective evidence, my observation of all other humans and also my own occasional confronting recognition says that I tend to leap to possibilities and construct a path of thinking to these conclusions post hoc. So long as I am diligent in path construction it doesn't matter in the slightest that it wasn't an actual decision procedure, however I ought to remember how many unrecognised alternative conclusions there may be that I never considered and certainly didn't evaluate or compare.

Perhaps LLMs are ever more like us in what increasingly seems to be an aspirational narrative of consciousness and intelligence, one which adheres to the story about how we think in our own presence such that we can observe our path through alternatives and defend our choice at every fork in the road. Perhaps we can recognise that we cannot hope to fully observe our inner mental process when that same observer is implemented in the same cerebral substrate of neurons and connections. Perhaps we gain a valuable insight into how we think when we recognise that we cannot possibly know enough about how we think to be so certain of ourselves. After all, isn't it a healthy mistrust of our own cognitive limitations that has given us formal analytical methods which offer to extend our human capacity just as a bicycle amplifies our human capacity with mechanical advantage?
